Economic activity
The economy grew by 0.4 per cent in the third quarter, exceeding expectations. Growth was driven 
mainly by an increase in consumption, partly reflecting one-off factors that boosted tourism over the 
summer, and by firms building up inventories. But the latest information suggests it is losing 
momentum. Surveys indicate that manufacturing is still contracting and growth in services is slowing. 
Firms are holding back their investment spending in the face of weak demand and a highly uncertain 
outlook. Exports are also weak, with some European industries finding it challenging to remain 
competitive. 
The labour market remains resilient. Employment grew by 0.2 per cent in the third quarter, again by 
more than expected. The unemployment rate remained at its historical low of 6.3 per cent in October. 
Meanwhile, demand for labour continues to weaken. The job vacancy rate declined to 2.5% in the third 
quarter, 0.8 percentage points below its peak, and surveys also point to fewer jobs being created in 
the current quarter. 
The economy should strengthen over time, although more slowly than previously expected. The rise in 
real wages should strengthen household spending. More affordable credit should boost consumption 
and investment. Provided trade tensions do not escalate, exports should support the recovery as 
global demand rises. 
Fiscal and structural policies should make the economy more productive, competitive and resilient. It is 
crucial to swiftly follow up, with concrete and ambitious structural policies, on Mario Draghi ’s proposals 
for enhancing European competitiveness and Enrico Letta’s proposals for empowering the Single 
Market. We welcome the European Commission’s assessment of governments’ medium-term plans 
for fiscal and structural policies, as part of the EU’s revised economic governance framework. 
Governments should now focus on implementing their commitments under this framework fully and 
without delay. This will help bring down budget deficits and debt ratios on a sustained basis, while 
prioritising growth-enhancing reforms and investment.