Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The disinflation process is well on track. Staff see headline inflation averaging 2.4 per cent in 2024, 
2.1 per cent in 2025, 1.9 per cent in 2026 and 2.1 per cent in 2027 when the expanded EU Emissions 
Trading System becomes operational. For inflation excluding energy and food, staff project an 
average of 2.9 per cent in 2024, 2.3 per cent in 2025 and 1.9 per cent in both 2026 and 2027. 
Most measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will settle at around our two per cent 
medium-term target on a sustained basis. Domestic inflation has edged down but remains high, mostly 
because wages and prices in certain sectors are still adjusting to the past inflation surge with a 
substantial delay. 
Financing conditions are easing, as our recent interest rate cuts gradually make new borrowing less 
expensive for firms and households. But they continue to be tight because our monetary policy 
remains restrictive and past interest rate hikes are still transmitting to the outstanding stock of credit.  
Staff now expect a slower economic recovery than in the September projections. Although growth 
picked up in the third quarter of this year, survey indicators suggest it has slowed in the current 
quarter. Staff see the economy growing by 0.7 per cent in 2024, 1.1 per cent in 2025, 1.4 per cent in 
2026 and 1.3 per cent in 2027. The projected recovery rests mainly on rising real incomes – which 
should allow households to consume more – and firms increasing investment. Over time, the gradually 
fading effects of restrictive monetary policy should support a pick-up in domestic demand.  
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our two per cent medium-term 
target. We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our 
assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics  
 
of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to 
a particular rate path. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.