 
 
European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 
 
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 
 
Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 
16 March 2023 
Monetary policy decisions 
Inflation is projected to remain too high for too long. Therefore, the Governing Council today decided 
to increase the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points, in line with its determination to ensure 
the timely return of inflation to the 2% medium-term target. The elevated level of uncertainty reinforces 
the importance of a data-dependent approach to the Governing Council’s policy rate decisions, which 
will be determined by its assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and 
financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The Governing Council is monitoring current market tensions closely and stands ready to respond as 
necessary to preserve price stability and financial stability in the euro area. The euro area banking 
sector is resilient, with strong capital and liquidity positions. In any case, the ECB’s policy toolkit is fully 
equipped to provide liquidity support to the euro area financial system if needed and to preserve the 
smooth transmission of monetary policy. 
The new ECB staff macroeconomic projections were finalised in early March before the recent 
emergence of financial market tensions. As such, these tensions imply additional uncertainty around 
the baseline assessments of inflation and growth. Prior to these latest developments, the baseline 
path for headline inflation had already been revised down, mainly owing to a smaller contribution from 
energy prices than previously expected. ECB staff now see inflation averaging 5.3% in 2023, 2.9% in 
2024 and 2.1% in 2025. At the same time, underlying price pressures remain strong. Inflation 
excluding energy and food continued to increase in February and ECB staff expect it to average 4.6% 
in 2023, which is higher than foreseen in the December projections. Subsequently, it is projected to 
come down to 2.5% in 2024 and 2.2% in 2025, as the upward pressures from past supply shocks and 
the reopening of the economy fade out and as tighter monetary policy increasingly dampens  demand.   
 
The baseline projections for growth in 2023 have been revised up to an average of 1.0% as a result of 
both the decline in energy prices and the economy’s greater resilience to the challenging international 
environment. ECB staff then expect growth to pick up further, to 1.6%, in both 2024 and 2025, 
underpinned by a robust labour market, improving confidence and a recovery in real incomes. At the 
same time, the pick-up in growth in 2024 and 2025 is weaker than projected in December, owing to 
the tightening of monetary policy.  
Key ECB interest rates 
The Governing Council decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points. 
Accordingly, the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal 
lending facility and the deposit facility will be increased to 3.50%, 3.75% and 3.00% respectively, with 
effect from 22 March 2023. 
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 
The APP portfolio is declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem does not 
reinvest all of the principal payments from maturing securities. The decline will amount to €15 billion 
per month on average until the end of June 2023 and its subsequent pace will be determined over 
time. 
As concerns the PEPP, the Governing Council intends to reinvest the principal payments from 
maturing securities purchased under the programme until at least the end of 2024. In any case, the 
future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid interference with the appropriate 
monetary policy stance. 
The Governing Council will continue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions coming due in the 
PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related 
to the pandemic. 
Refinancing operations 
As banks are repaying the amounts borrowed under the targeted longer-term refinancing operations, 
the Governing Council will regularly assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to its 
monetary policy stance.   
 
*** 
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that 
inflation returns to its 2% target over the medium term and to preserve the smooth functioning of 
monetary policy transmission. The ECB’s policy toolkit is fully equipped to provide liquidity support to 
the euro area financial system if needed. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is 
available to counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the 
transmission of monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to 
more effectively deliver on its price stability mandate.  
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 
conference starting at 14:45 CET today. 
   
 
Monetary policy statement 
Press conference 
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.  
Inflation is projected to remain too high for too long. Therefore, the Governing Council today decided 
to increase the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points, in line with our determination to 
ensure the timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target. The elevated level of 
uncertainty reinforces the importance of a data-dependent approach to our policy rate decisions, 
which will be determined by our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. 
We are monitoring current market tensions closely and stand ready to respond as necessary to 
preserve price stability and financial stability in the euro area. The euro area banking sector is 
resilient, with strong capital and liquidity positions. In any case, our policy toolkit is fully equipped to 
provide liquidity support to the euro area financial system if needed and to preserve the smooth 
transmission of monetary policy. 
The new ECB staff macroeconomic projections were finalised in early March before the recent 
emergence of financial market tensions. As such, these tensions imply additional uncertainty around 
the baseline assessments of inflation and growth. Prior to these latest developments, the baseline 
path for headline inflation had already been revised down, mainly owing to a smaller contribution from 
energy prices than previously expected. ECB staff now see inflation averaging 5.3 per cent in 2023, 
2.9 per cent in 2024 and 2.1 per cent in 2025. At the same time, underlying price pressures remain 
strong. Inflation excluding energy and food continued to increase in February and ECB staff expect it 
to average 4.6 per cent in 2023, which is higher than foreseen in the December projections. 
Subsequently, it is projected to come down to 2.5 per cent in 2024 and 2.2 per cent in 2025, as the 
upward pressures from past supply shocks and the reopening of the economy fade out and as tighter 
monetary policy increasingly dampens demand.  
The baseline projections for growth in 2023 have been revised up to an average of 1.0 per cent as a 
result of both the decline in energy prices and the economy’s greater resilience to the challenging 
international environment. ECB staff then expect growth to pick up further, to 1.6 per cent, in both  
 
2024 and 2025, underpinned by a robust labour market, improving confidence and a recovery in real 
incomes. At the same time, the pick-up in growth in 2024 and 2025 is weaker than projected in 
December, owing to the tightening of monetary policy.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. 
Economic activity 
The euro area economy stagnated in the fourth quarter of 2022, thus avoiding the previously expected 
contraction. However, private domestic demand fell sharply. High inflation, prevailing uncertainties and 
tighter financing conditions dented private consumption and investment, which fell by 0.9 per cent and 
3.6 per cent respectively.  
Under the baseline, the economy looks set to recover over the coming quarters. Industrial production 
should pick up as supply conditions improve further, confidence continues to recover, and firms work 
off large order backlogs. Rising wages and falling energy prices will partly offset the loss of purchasing 
power that many households are experiencing as a result of high inflation. This, in turn, will support 
consumer spending.  
Moreover, the labour market remains strong, despite the weakening of economic activity. Employment 
grew by 0.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2022 and the unemployment rate stayed at its historical 
low of 6.6 per cent in January 2023.  
Government support measures to shield the economy from the impact of high energy prices should be 
temporary, targeted and tailored to preserving incentives to consume less energy. As energy prices 
fall and risks around the energy supply recede, it is important to start rolling back these measures 
promptly and in a concerted manner. Measures falling short of these principles are likely to drive up 
medium-term inflationary pressures, which would call for a stronger monetary policy response. 
Moreover, in line with the EU’s economic governance framework and as stated in the European 
Commission’s guidance of 8 March 2023, fiscal policies should be oriented towards making our 
economy more productive and gradually bringing down high public debt. Policies to enhance the euro 
area’s supply capacity, especially in the energy sector, can help reduce price pressures in the medium 
term. To that end, governments should swiftly implement their investment and structural reform plans 
under the Next Generation EU programme. The reform of the EU’s economic governance framework 
should be concluded rapidly.  
 
Inflation 
Inflation edged down to 8.5 per cent in February. The decline resulted from a renewed sharp drop in 
energy prices. By contrast, food price inflation increased further, to 15.0 per cent, with the past surge 
in the cost of energy and of other inputs for food production still feeding through to consumer  prices.  
Moreover, underlying price pressures remain strong. Inflation excluding energy and food increased to 
5.6 per cent in February and other indicators of underlying inflation have also stayed high. Non-energy 
industrial goods inflation rose to 6.8 per cent in February, mainly reflecting the delayed effects of past 
supply bottlenecks and high energy prices. Services inflation, which rose to 4.8 per cent in February, 
is also still being driven by the gradual pass-through of past energy cost increases, pent-up demand 
from the reopening of the economy and rising wages.  
Wage pressures have strengthened on the back of robust labour markets and employees aiming to 
recoup some of the purchasing power lost owing to high inflation. Moreover, many firms were able to 
raise their profit margins in sectors faced with constrained supply and resurgent demand. At the same 
time, most measures of longer-term inflation expectations currently stand at around two per cent, 
although they warrant continued monitoring, especially in light of recent volatility in market -based 
inflation expectations. 
Risk assessment  
Risks to the outlook for economic growth are tilted to the downside. Persistently elevated financial 
market tensions could tighten broader credit conditions more strongly than expected and dampen 
confidence. Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and its people continues to be a significant 
downside risk to the economy and could again push up the costs of energy and food. There could also 
be an additional drag on euro area growth if the world economy weakened more sharply than 
expected. However, companies could adapt more quickly to the challenging international environment 
and, together with the fading-out of the energy shock, this could support higher growth than currently 
expected. 
The upside risks to inflation include existing pipeline pressures that could still send retail prices even 
higher than expected in the near term. Domestic factors, such as a persistent rise in inflation 
expectations above our target or higher than anticipated increases in wages and profit margins , could 
drive inflation higher, including over the medium term. Moreover, a stronger than expected economic 
rebound in China could give a fresh boost to commodity prices and foreign demand. T he downside 
risks to inflation include persistently elevated financial market tensions that could accelerate 
disinflation. In addition, falling energy prices could translate into reduced pressure from underlying  
 
inflation and wages. A weakening of demand, including owing to a stronger deceleration of bank credit 
or a stronger than projected transmission of monetary policy, would also contribute to lower price 
pressures than currently anticipated, especially over the medium term.  
Financial and monetary conditions  
Market interest rates rose considerably in the weeks following our last meeting. But the increase has 
strongly reversed over recent days in a context of severe financial market tensions. Bank credit to 
euro area firms has become more expensive. Credit to firms has weakened further, owing to lower 
demand and tighter credit supply conditions. Household borrowing has become more expensive as 
well, especially owing to higher mortgage rates. This rise in borrowing costs and the resultant decline 
in demand, along with tighter credit standards, have led to a further slowdown in the growth of loans to 
households. Amid these weaker loan dynamics, money growth has slowed sharply, driven by its most 
liquid components. 
Conclusion  
Summing up, inflation is projected to remain too high for too long. Therefore, the Governing Council 
today decided to increase the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points, in line with our 
determination to ensure the timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium- term target. The 
elevated level of uncertainty reinforces the importance of a data-dependent approach to our policy rate 
decisions, which will be determined by our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming 
economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. We are monitoring current market tensions closely and stand ready to respond as 
necessary to preserve price stability and financial stability in the euro area. 
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation 
returns to our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy 
transmission. 
We are now ready to take your questions. 