Economic activity
The euro area economy stagnated in the fourth quarter of 2022, thus avoiding the previously expected 
contraction. However, private domestic demand fell sharply. High inflation, prevailing uncertainties and 
tighter financing conditions dented private consumption and investment, which fell by 0.9 per cent and 
3.6 per cent respectively.  
Under the baseline, the economy looks set to recover over the coming quarters. Industrial production 
should pick up as supply conditions improve further, confidence continues to recover, and firms work 
off large order backlogs. Rising wages and falling energy prices will partly offset the loss of purchasing 
power that many households are experiencing as a result of high inflation. This, in turn, will support 
consumer spending.  
Moreover, the labour market remains strong, despite the weakening of economic activity. Employment 
grew by 0.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2022 and the unemployment rate stayed at its historical 
low of 6.6 per cent in January 2023.  
Government support measures to shield the economy from the impact of high energy prices should be 
temporary, targeted and tailored to preserving incentives to consume less energy. As energy prices 
fall and risks around the energy supply recede, it is important to start rolling back these measures 
promptly and in a concerted manner. Measures falling short of these principles are likely to drive up 
medium-term inflationary pressures, which would call for a stronger monetary policy response. 
Moreover, in line with the EU’s economic governance framework and as stated in the European 
Commission’s guidance of 8 March 2023, fiscal policies should be oriented towards making our 
economy more productive and gradually bringing down high public debt. Policies to enhance the euro 
area’s supply capacity, especially in the energy sector, can help reduce price pressures in the medium 
term. To that end, governments should swiftly implement their investment and structural reform plans 
under the Next Generation EU programme. The reform of the EU’s economic governance framework 
should be concluded rapidly.