Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.  
Inflation is projected to remain too high for too long. Therefore, the Governing Council today decided 
to increase the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points, in line with our determination to 
ensure the timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target. The elevated level of 
uncertainty reinforces the importance of a data-dependent approach to our policy rate decisions, 
which will be determined by our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. 
We are monitoring current market tensions closely and stand ready to respond as necessary to 
preserve price stability and financial stability in the euro area. The euro area banking sector is 
resilient, with strong capital and liquidity positions. In any case, our policy toolkit is fully equipped to 
provide liquidity support to the euro area financial system if needed and to preserve the smooth 
transmission of monetary policy. 
The new ECB staff macroeconomic projections were finalised in early March before the recent 
emergence of financial market tensions. As such, these tensions imply additional uncertainty around 
the baseline assessments of inflation and growth. Prior to these latest developments, the baseline 
path for headline inflation had already been revised down, mainly owing to a smaller contribution from 
energy prices than previously expected. ECB staff now see inflation averaging 5.3 per cent in 2023, 
2.9 per cent in 2024 and 2.1 per cent in 2025. At the same time, underlying price pressures remain 
strong. Inflation excluding energy and food continued to increase in February and ECB staff expect it 
to average 4.6 per cent in 2023, which is higher than foreseen in the December projections. 
Subsequently, it is projected to come down to 2.5 per cent in 2024 and 2.2 per cent in 2025, as the 
upward pressures from past supply shocks and the reopening of the economy fade out and as tighter 
monetary policy increasingly dampens demand.  
The baseline projections for growth in 2023 have been revised up to an average of 1.0 per cent as a 
result of both the decline in energy prices and the economy’s greater resilience to the challenging 
international environment. ECB staff then expect growth to pick up further, to 1.6 per cent, in both  
 
2024 and 2025, underpinned by a robust labour market, improving confidence and a recovery in real 
incomes. At the same time, the pick-up in growth in 2024 and 2025 is weaker than projected in 
December, owing to the tightening of monetary policy.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.