Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.  
The Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points and, 
based on the substantial upward revision to the inflation outlook, we expect to raise them further. In 
particular, we judge that interest rates will still have to rise significantly at a steady pace to reach levels 
that are sufficiently restrictive to ensure a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term 
target. Keeping interest rates at restrictive levels will over time reduce inflation by dampening demand 
and will also guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation expectations. Our future 
policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent and follow a meeting-by-meeting approach.  
The key ECB interest rates are our primary tool for setting the monetary policy stance. The Governing 
Council today also discussed principles for normalising the Eurosystem’s monetary policy securities 
holdings. From the beginning of March 2023 onwards, the asset purchase programme (APP) portfolio 
will decline at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem will not reinvest all of the principal 
payments from maturing securities. The decline will amount to €15 billion per month on average until 
the end of the second quarter of 2023 and its subsequent pace will be determined over time.  
At its February meeting the Governing Council will announce the detailed parameters for reducing the 
APP holdings. The Governing Council will regularly reassess the pace of the APP portfolio reduction 
to ensure it remains consistent with the overall monetary policy strategy and stance, to preserve 
market functioning, and to maintain firm control over short-term money market conditions. By the end 
of 2023, we will also review our operational framework for steering short-term interest rates, which will 
provide information regarding the endpoint of the balance sheet normalisation process. 
We decided to raise interest rates today, and expect to raise them significantly further, because 
inflation remains far too high and is projected to stay above our target for too long. According to 
Eurostat’s flash estimate, inflation was 10.0 per cent in November, slightly lower than the 10.6 per cent 
recorded in October. The decline resulted mainly from lower energy price inflation. Food price inflation 
and underlying price pressures across the economy have strengthened and will persist for some time. 
Amid exceptional uncertainty, Eurosystem staff have significantly revised up their inflation projections. 
They now see average inflation reaching 8.4 per cent in 2022 before decreasing to 6.3 per cent in 
2023, with inflation expected to decline markedly over the course of the year. Inflation is then  
 
projected to average 3.4 per cent in 2024 and 2.3 per cent in 2025. Inflation excluding energy and 
food is projected to be 3.9 per cent on average in 2022 and to rise to 4.2 per cent in 2023, before 
falling to 2.8 per cent in 2024 and 2.4 per cent in 2025. 
The euro area economy may contract in the current quarter and the next quarter, owing to the energy 
crisis, high uncertainty, weakening global economic activity and tighter financing conditions. According 
to the latest Eurosystem staff projections, a recession would be relatively short-lived and shallow. 
Growth is nonetheless expected to be subdued next year and has been revised down significantly 
compared with the previous projections. Beyond the near term, growth is projected to recover as the 
current headwinds fade. Overall, the Eurosystem staff projections now see the economy growing by 
3.4 per cent in 2022, 0.5 per cent in 2023, 1.9 per cent in 2024 and 1.8 per cent in 2025.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.