Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. While 
inflation has dropped in recent months, it is likely to pick up again temporarily in the near term. 
According to the latest Eurosystem staff projections for the euro area, inflation is expected to decline 
gradually over the course of next year, before approaching our two per cent target in 2025. Overall, 
staff expect headline inflation to average 5.4 per cent in 2023, 2.7 per cent in 2024, 2.1 per cent in 
2025 and 1.9 per cent in 2026. Compared with the September staff projections, this amounts to a 
downward revision for 2023 and especially for 2024. 
Underlying inflation has eased further. But domestic price pressures remain elevated, primarily owing 
to strong growth in unit labour costs. Eurosystem staff expect inflation excluding energy and food to 
average 5.0 per cent in 2023, 2.7 per cent in 2024, 2.3 per cent in 2025 and 2.1 per cent in 2026.  
Our past interest rate increases continue to be transmitted forcefully to the economy. Tighter financing 
conditions are dampening demand, and this is helping to push down inflation. Eurosystem staff expect 
economic growth to remain subdued in the near term. Beyond that, the economy is expected to 
recover because of rising real incomes – as people benefit from falling inflation and growing wages – 
and improving foreign demand. Eurosystem staff therefore see growth picking up from an average of 
0.6 per cent for 2023 to 0.8 per cent for 2024, and to 1.5 per cent for both 2025 and 2026. 
We are determined to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner. Based on our current assessment, we consider that the key ECB interest rates are at levels 
that, maintained for a sufficiently long duration, will make a substantial contribution to this goal. Our 
future decisions will ensure that our policy rates will be set at sufficiently restrictive levels for as long 
as necessary. 
We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to determining the appropriate level and 
duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the 
inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying 
inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
 
The key ECB interest rates are our primary tool for setting the monetary policy stance.  We also 
decided today to advance the normalisation of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. The Governing 
Council intends to continue to reinvest, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities 
purchased under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) during the first half of 2024. 
Over the second half of the year, it intends to reduce the PEPP portfolio by €7.5 billion per month on 
average. The Governing Council intends to discontinue reinvestments under the PEPP at the end of 
2024.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.