Economic activity
The incoming information indicates that the euro area economy grew in the second quarter, but likely 
at a slower pace than in the first quarter. Services continue to lead the recovery, while industrial 
production and goods exports have been weak. Investment indicators point to muted growth in 2024, 
amid heightened uncertainty. Looking ahead, we expect the recovery to be supported by consumption, 
driven by the strengthening of real incomes resulting from lower inflation and higher nominal wages.  
 
Moreover, exports should pick up alongside a rise in global demand. Finally, monetary policy should 
exert less of a drag on demand over time. 
The labour market remains resilient. The unemployment rate was unchanged, at 6.4 per cent in May, 
remaining at its lowest level since the start of the euro. Employment, which grew by 0.3 per cent in the 
first quarter, was supported by a further increase in the labour force, which expanded at the same 
rate. More jobs are likely to have been created in the second quarter, mainly in the services sector. 
Firms are gradually reducing their job postings, but from high levels.  
National fiscal and structural policies should aim at making the economy more productive and 
competitive, which would help to raise potential growth and reduce price pressures in the medium 
term. An effective, speedy and full implementation of the Next Generation EU programme, progress 
towards capital markets union and the completion of banking union, and a strengthening of the Single 
Market are key factors that would help foster innovation and increase investment in the green and 
digital transitions. We welcome the European Commission’s recent guidance calling for EU Member 
States to strengthen fiscal sustainability and the Eurogroup’s statement on the fiscal stance for the 
euro area in 2025. Implementing the EU’s revised economic governance framework fully and without 
delay will help governments bring down budget deficits and debt ratios on a sustained basis.