 
 
European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 
 
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 
 
Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 
4 May 2023  
Monetary policy decisions 
The inflation outlook continues to be too high for too long. In light of the ongoing high inflation 
pressures, the Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis 
points. Overall, the incoming information broadly supports the assessment of the medium- term 
inflation outlook that the Governing Council formed at its previous meeting. Headline inflation has 
declined over recent months, but underlying price pressures remain strong. At the same time, the past 
rate increases are being transmitted forcefully to euro area financing and monetary conditions, while 
the lags and strength of transmission to the real economy remain uncertain. 
The Governing Council’s future decisions will ensure that the policy rates will be brought to levels 
sufficiently restrictive to achieve a timely return of inflation to the 2% medium-term target and will be 
kept at those levels for as long as necessary. The Governing Council will continue to follow a data-
dependent approach to determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, the 
Governing Council’s policy rate decisions will continue to be based on its assessment of the inflation 
outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and 
the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The key ECB interest rates remain the Governing Council’s primary tool for setting the monetary policy 
stance. In parallel, the Governing Council will keep reducing the Eurosystem’s asset purchase 
programme (APP) portfolio at a measured and predictable pace. In line with these principles, the 
Governing Council expects to discontinue the reinvestments under the APP as of July 2023.  
 
Key ECB interest rates 
The Governing Council decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. 
Accordingly, the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal 
lending facility and the deposit facility will be increased to 3.75%, 4.00% and 3.25% respectively, with 
effect from 10 May 2023. 
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 
The APP portfolio is declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem does not 
reinvest all of the principal payments from maturing securities. The decline will amount to €15 billion 
per month on average until the end of June 2023. The Governing Council expects to discontinue the 
reinvestments under the APP as of July 2023. 
As concerns the PEPP, the Governing Council intends to reinvest the principal payments from 
maturing securities purchased under the programme until at least the end of 2024. In any case, the 
future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid interference with the appropriate 
monetary policy stance. 
The Governing Council will continue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions coming due in the 
PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related 
to the pandemic. 
Refinancing operations 
As banks are repaying the amounts borrowed under the targeted longer-term refinancing operations, 
the Governing Council will regularly assess how targeted lending operations are contributing to its 
monetary policy stance.  
*** 
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that 
inflation returns to its 2% target over the medium term and to preserve the smooth functioning of 
monetary policy transmission. The ECB’s policy toolkit is fully equipped to provide liquidity support to 
the euro area financial system if needed. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is 
available to counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the  
 
transmission of monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to 
more effectively deliver on its price stability mandate.  
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 
conference starting at 14:45 CET today. 
   
 
Monetary policy statement 
Press conference 
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The inflation outlook continues to be too high for too long. In light of the ongoing high inflation 
pressures, the Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis 
points. Overall, the incoming information broadly supports the assessment of the medium-term 
inflation outlook that we formed at our previous meeting. Headline inflation has declined over recent 
months, but underlying price pressures remain strong. At the same time, our past rate increases are 
being transmitted forcefully to euro area financing and monetary conditions, while the lags and 
strength of transmission to the real economy remain uncertain. 
Our future decisions will ensure that the policy rates will be brought to levels sufficiently restrictive to 
achieve a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target and will be kept at those 
levels for as long as necessary. We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to determining 
the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our policy rate decisions  will continue to 
be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial 
data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The key ECB interest rates remain our primary tool for setting the monetary policy stance. In parallel, 
we will keep reducing the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme (APP) portfolio at a measured and 
predictable pace. In line with these principles, the Governing Council expects to discontinue the 
reinvestments under the APP as of July 2023. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. 
Economic activity 
The euro area economy grew by 0.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2023, according to Eurostat’s 
preliminary flash estimate. Lower energy prices, the easing of supply bottlenecks and fiscal policy  
 
support for firms and households have contributed to the resilience of the economy. At the same time, 
private domestic demand, especially consumption, is likely to have remained weak. 
Business and consumer confidence have recovered steadily in recent months but remain weaker than 
before Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and its people. We see a divergence across sectors of 
the economy. The manufacturing sector is working through a backlog of orders, but its prospects are 
worsening. The services sector is growing more strongly, especially owing to the reopening of the 
economy. 
Household incomes are benefiting from the strength of the labour market, with the unemployment rate 
falling to a new historical low of 6.5 per cent in March. Employment has continued to grow and total 
hours worked exceed pre-pandemic levels. At the same time, the average number of hours worked 
remains somewhat below its pre-pandemic level and its recovery has stalled since mid-2022. 
As the energy crisis fades, governments should roll back the related support measures promptly and 
in a concerted manner to avoid driving up medium-term inflationary pressures, which would call for a 
stronger monetary policy response. Fiscal policies should be oriented towards making our economy 
more productive and gradually bringing down high public debt. Policies to enhance the euro area’s 
supply capacity, especially in the energy sector, can also help reduce price pressures in the medium 
term. In this regard, we welcome the publication of the European Commission’s legislative proposals 
for the reform of the EU’s economic governance framework, which should be concluded soon. 
Inflation 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, inflation was 7.0 per cent in April, after having dropped from 
8.5 per cent in February to 6.9 per cent in March. While base effects led to some increase in energy 
price inflation, from -0.9 per cent in March to 2.5 per cent in April, the rate stands far below those 
recorded after the start of Russia’s war against Ukraine. Food price inflation remains elevated, 
however, standing at 13.6 per cent in April, after 15.5 per cent in March. 
Price pressures remain strong. Inflation excluding energy and food was 5.6 per cent in April, having 
edged down slightly compared with March to return to its February level. Non-energy industrial goods 
inflation fell to 6.2 per cent in April, from 6.6 per cent in March, when it declined for the first time in 
several months. But services inflation increased to 5.2 per cent in April, from 5.1 per cent in March. 
Inflation is still being pushed up by the gradual pass-through of past energy cost increases and supply 
bottlenecks. In services, especially, it is still being pushed higher also by pent-up demand from the 
reopening of the economy and by rising wages. The information available up to March suggests that 
indicators of underlying inflation remain high.  
 
Wage pressures have strengthened further as employees, in a context of a robust labour market, 
recoup some of the purchasing power they have lost as a result of high inflation. Moreover, in some 
sectors firms have been able to increase their profit margins on the back of mismatches between 
supply and demand and the uncertainty created by high and volatile inflation. Although most measures 
of longer-term inflation expectations currently stand at around two per cent, some indicators have 
edged up and warrant continued monitoring. 
Risk assessment  
Renewed financial market tensions, if persistent, would pose a downside risk to the outlook for growth 
as they could tighten broader credit conditions more strongly than expected and dampen confidence. 
Russia’s war against Ukraine also continues to be a significant downside risk to the economy. 
However, the recent reversal of past adverse supply shocks, if sustained, could spur confidence and 
support higher growth than currently expected. The continued resilience of the labour market, by 
bolstering household confidence and spending, could also lead to higher growth than anticipated.  
There are still significant upside risks to the inflation outlook. These include existing pipeline pressures 
that could send retail prices higher than expected in the near term. Moreover, Russia’s war against 
Ukraine could again push up the costs of energy and food. A lasting rise in inflation expectations 
above our target, or higher than anticipated increases in wages or profit margins, could also drive 
inflation higher, including over the medium term. Recent negotiated wage agreements have added to 
the upside risks to inflation, especially if profit margins remain high. The downside risks include 
renewed financial market tensions, which could bring inflation down faster than projected. Weaker 
demand, due for example to a more marked slowing of bank lending or a stronger transmission of 
monetary policy, would also lead to lower price pressures than currently anticipated, especially over 
the medium term. 
Financial and monetary conditions 
The euro area banking sector has proved resilient in the face of the financial market tensions that 
arose ahead of our last meeting. Our policy rate increases are being transmitted strongly to risk-free 
interest rates and to the financing conditions for firms, households and banks. For firms and 
households, loan growth has weakened owing to higher borrowing rates, tighter credit supply 
conditions and lower demand. Our latest bank lending survey reported a tightening of overall credit 
standards, which was stronger than banks had expected in the previous round and suggests that 
lending may weaken further. Weak lending has meant that money growth has also continued to 
decline.  
 
Conclusion  
Summing up, the inflation outlook continues to be too high for too long. In light of the ongoing high 
inflation pressures, the Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 
25 basis points. Overall, the incoming information broadly supports the assessment of the medium-
term inflation outlook that we formed at our previous meeting. Headline inflation has declined over 
recent months, but underlying price pressures remain strong. At the same time, our past rate 
increases are being transmitted forcefully to euro area financing and monetary conditions, while the 
lags and strength of transmission to the real economy remain uncertain. 
Our future decisions will ensure that the policy rates will be brought to levels sufficiently res trictive to 
achieve a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target and will be kept at those 
levels for as long as necessary. We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to determining 
the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our policy rate decisions will continue to 
be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial 
data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmis sion. 
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation 
returns to our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy 
transmission. 
We are now ready to take your questions. 
 