Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The inflation outlook continues to be too high for too long. In light of the ongoing high inflation 
pressures, the Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis 
points. Overall, the incoming information broadly supports the assessment of the medium-term 
inflation outlook that we formed at our previous meeting. Headline inflation has declined over recent 
months, but underlying price pressures remain strong. At the same time, our past rate increases are 
being transmitted forcefully to euro area financing and monetary conditions, while the lags and 
strength of transmission to the real economy remain uncertain. 
Our future decisions will ensure that the policy rates will be brought to levels sufficiently restrictive to 
achieve a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target and will be kept at those 
levels for as long as necessary. We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to determining 
the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our policy rate decisions  will continue to 
be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial 
data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The key ECB interest rates remain our primary tool for setting the monetary policy stance. In parallel, 
we will keep reducing the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme (APP) portfolio at a measured and 
predictable pace. In line with these principles, the Governing Council expects to discontinue the 
reinvestments under the APP as of July 2023. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.