 
 
European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 
 
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 
 
Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 
15 June 2023 
Monetary policy decisions 
Inflation has been coming down but is projected to remain too high for too long. The Governing 
Council is determined to ensure that inflation returns to its 2% medium-term target in a timely manner. 
It therefore today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. 
The rate increase today reflects the Governing Council’s updated assessment of the inflation outlook , 
the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission. According to 
the June macroeconomic projections, Eurosystem staff expect headline inflation to average 5.4% in 
2023, 3.0% in 2024 and 2.2% in 2025. Indicators of underlying price pressures remain strong, 
although some show tentative signs of softening. Staff have revised up their projections for inflation 
excluding energy and food, especially for this year and next year, owing to past upward surprises and 
the implications of the robust labour market for the speed of disinflation. They now see it reaching 
5.1% in 2023, before it declines to 3.0% in 2024 and 2.3% in 2025. Staff have slightly lowered their 
economic growth projections for this year and next year. They now expect the economy to grow by 
0.9% in 2023, 1.5% in 2024 and 1.6% in 2025. 
At the same time, the Governing Council’s past rate increases are being transmitted forcefully to 
financing conditions and are gradually having an impact across the economy. Borrowing costs have 
increased steeply and growth in loans is slowing. Tighter financing conditions are a key reason why 
inflation is projected to decline further towards target, as they are expected to increasingly dampen 
demand.  
The Governing Council’s future decisions will ensure that the key ECB interest rates will be brought to 
levels sufficiently restrictive to achieve a timely return of inflation to the 2% medium-term target and 
will be kept at those levels for as long as necessary. The Governing Council will continue to follow a 
data-dependent approach to determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular,  
 
its interest rate decisions will continue to be based on its assessment of the inflation outlook in light of 
the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of 
monetary policy transmission. 
The Governing Council confirms that it will discontinue the reinvestments under the asset purchase 
programme as of July 2023. 
Key ECB interest rates 
The Governing Council decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points.  
Accordingly, the interest rate on the main refinancing operations and the interest rates on the marginal 
lending facility and the deposit facility will be increased to 4.00%, 4.25% and 3.50% respectively, with 
effect from 21 June 2023. 
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 
The APP portfolio is declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem does not 
reinvest all of the principal payments from maturing securities. The decline will amount to €15 billion 
per month on average until the end of June 2023. The Governing Council will discontinue the 
reinvestments under the APP as of July 2023. 
As concerns the PEPP, the Governing Council intends to reinvest the principal payments from 
maturing securities purchased under the programme until at least the end of 2024. In any case, the 
future roll-off of the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid interference with the appropriate 
monetary policy stance. 
The Governing Council will continue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions coming due in the 
PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related 
to the pandemic. 
Refinancing operations 
As banks are repaying the amounts borrowed under the targeted longer-term refinancing operations, 
the Governing Council will regularly assess how targeted lending operations and their ongoing 
repayment are contributing to its monetary policy stance.   
 
*** 
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that 
inflation returns to its 2% target over the medium term and to preserve the smooth functioning of 
monetary policy transmission. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is available to 
counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the transmission of 
monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to more effectivel y 
deliver on its price stability mandate.  
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 
conference starting at 14:45 CET today. 
   
 
Monetary policy statement 
Press conference 
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
Inflation has been coming down but is projected to remain too high for too long. We are determined to 
ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely manner. The Governing 
Council therefore today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points.   
The rate increase today reflects our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission. According to the June 
macroeconomic projections, Eurosystem staff expect headline inflation to average 5.4 per cent in 
2023, 3.0 per cent in 2024 and 2.2 per cent in 2025. Indicators of underlying price pressures remain 
strong, although some show tentative signs of softening. Staff have revised up their projections for 
inflation excluding energy and food, especially for this year and next year, owing to past upward 
surprises and the implications of the robust labour market for the speed of disinflation. They now see it 
reaching 5.1 per cent in 2023, before it declines to 3.0 per cent in 2024 and 2.3 per cent in 2025. Staff 
have slightly lowered their economic growth projections for this year and next year. They now expect 
the economy to grow by 0.9 per cent in 2023, 1.5 per cent in 2024 and 1.6 per cent in 2025.  
At the same time, our past rate increases are being transmitted forcefully to financing conditions and 
are gradually having an impact across the economy. Borrowing costs have increased steeply and 
growth in loans is slowing. Tighter financing conditions are a key reason why inflation is projected to 
decline further towards our target, as they are expected to increasingly dampen demand.  
Our future decisions will ensure that the key ECB interest rates will be brought to levels sufficiently 
restrictive to achieve a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target and will be kept 
at those levels for as long as necessary. We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to 
determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions 
will continue to be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. 
The Governing Council confirms that it will discontinue the reinvestments under the asset purchase 
programme as of July 2023.  
 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions. 
Economic activity 
The euro area economy has stagnated in recent months. As in the fourth quarter of last year, it shrank 
by 0.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2023, amid a drop in private and public consumption. Economic 
growth is likely to remain weak in the short run but strengthen in the course of the year, as inflation 
comes down and supply disruptions continue to ease. Conditions in different sectors of the economy 
are uneven: manufacturing continues to weaken, partly owing to lower global demand and tighter euro 
area financing conditions, while services remain resilient.  
The labour market remains a source of strength. Almost a million new jobs were added in the first 
quarter of the year and the unemployment rate stood at its historical low of 6.5 per cent in April. The 
average number of hours worked has also increased, although it is still somewhat below its pre-
pandemic level. 
As the energy crisis fades, governments should roll back the related support measures promptly and 
in a concerted manner to avoid driving up medium-term inflationary pressures, which would call for a 
stronger monetary policy response. Fiscal policies should be designed to make our economy more 
productive and gradually bring down high public debt. Policies to enhance the euro area’s supply 
capacity, especially in the energy sector, can also help reduce price pressures in the medium term. 
The reform of the EU’s economic governance framework should be concluded soon.  
Inflation 
Inflation fell further to 6.1 per cent in May, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, from 7.0 per cent in 
April. The decline was broad-based. Energy price inflation, which had risen in April, resumed its 
downward trend and was negative in May. Food price inflation fell again but remained high at 12.5 per 
cent. 
Inflation excluding energy and food declined in May for the second month in a row, to 5.3 per cent 
from 5.6 per cent in April. Goods inflation decreased further, to 5.8 per cent from 6.2 per cent in April. 
Services inflation fell for the first time in several months, from 5.2 per cent to 5.0 per cent. Indicators of 
underlying price pressures remain strong, although some show tentative signs of softening.  
 
Past increases in energy costs are still pushing up prices across the economy. Pent-up demand from 
the reopening of the economy also continues to drive up inflation, especially in services. Wage 
pressures, while partly reflecting one-off payments, are becoming an increasingly important source of 
inflation. Compensation per employee rose by 5.2 per cent in the first quarter of the year and 
negotiated wages by 4.3 per cent. Moreover, firms in some sectors have been able to keep profits 
relatively high, especially where demand has outstripped supply. Although most measures of longer-
term inflation expectations currently stand at around 2 per cent, some indicators remain elevated and 
need to be monitored closely.  
Risk assessment  
The outlook for economic growth and inflation remains highly uncertain. Downside risks to growth 
include Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and an increase in broader geopolitical tensions, 
which could fragment global trade and thus weigh on the euro area economy. Growth could also be 
slower if the effects of monetary policy are more forceful than projected. Renewed financial market 
tensions could lead to even tighter financing conditions than anticipated and weaken confidence. Also, 
weaker growth in the world economy could further dampen economic activity in the euro area. 
However, growth could be higher than projected if the strong labour market and receding uncertainty 
mean that people and businesses become more confident and spend more.  
Upside risks to inflation include potential renewed upward pressures on the costs of energy and food, 
also related to Russia’s war against Ukraine. A lasting rise in inflation expectations above our target, 
or higher than anticipated increases in wages or profit margins, could also drive inflation higher, 
including over the medium term. Recent wage agreements in a number of countries have added to the 
upside risks to inflation. By contrast, renewed financial market tensions could bring inflation down 
faster than projected. Weaker demand, for example due to a stronger transmission of monetary policy, 
would also lead to lower price pressures, especially over the medium term. Moreover, inflation would 
come down faster if declining energy prices and lower food price increases were to pass through to 
other goods and services more quickly than currently anticipated. 
Financial and monetary conditions 
Our monetary policy tightening continues to be reflected in risk-free interest rates and broader 
financing conditions. Funding conditions are tighter for banks and credit is becoming more expensive 
for firms and households. In April lending rates reached their highest level in more than a decade, 
standing at 4.4 per cent for business loans and 3.4 per cent for mortgages.   
 
These higher borrowing rates, together with tighter credit supply conditions and lower loan demand, 
have further weakened credit dynamics. The annual growth of loans to firms declined again in April, to 
4.6 per cent. The month-on-month changes have been negative on average since November. Loans 
to households grew at an annual rate of 2.5 per cent in April and increased only marginally month on 
month. Weak bank lending and the reduction in the Eurosystem balance sheet led to a continued 
decline in annual broad money growth to 1.9 per cent in April. Month-on-month changes in broad 
money have been negative since December. 
In line with our monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council thoroughly assessed the links 
between monetary policy and financial stability. The financial stability outlook has remained 
challenging since our last review in December 2022. Tighter financing conditions are raising banks’ 
funding costs and the credit risk of outstanding loans. Together with the recent tensions in the US 
banking system, these factors could give rise to systemic stress and depress economic growth in the 
short term. Another factor weighing on the resilience of the financial sector is a downturn in the real 
estate markets, which could be amplified by higher borrowing costs and a rise in unemployment. At 
the same time, euro area banks have strong capital and liquidity positions, which mitigate these 
financial stability risks. Macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence against the build-up of 
financial vulnerabilities. 
Conclusion  
Inflation has been coming down but is projected to remain too high for too long. The Governing 
Council therefore today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points, in view of  
our determination to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner.  
Our future decisions will ensure that the key ECB interest rates will be brought to levels sufficiently 
restrictive to achieve a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target and will be kept 
at those levels for as long as necessary. We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to 
determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions 
will continue to be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. 
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation 
returns to our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy 
transmission.  
 
We are now ready to take your questions. 
 