Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
Inflation has been coming down but is projected to remain too high for too long. We are determined to 
ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely manner. The Governing 
Council therefore today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points.   
The rate increase today reflects our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission. According to the June 
macroeconomic projections, Eurosystem staff expect headline inflation to average 5.4 per cent in 
2023, 3.0 per cent in 2024 and 2.2 per cent in 2025. Indicators of underlying price pressures remain 
strong, although some show tentative signs of softening. Staff have revised up their projections for 
inflation excluding energy and food, especially for this year and next year, owing to past upward 
surprises and the implications of the robust labour market for the speed of disinflation. They now see it 
reaching 5.1 per cent in 2023, before it declines to 3.0 per cent in 2024 and 2.3 per cent in 2025. Staff 
have slightly lowered their economic growth projections for this year and next year. They now expect 
the economy to grow by 0.9 per cent in 2023, 1.5 per cent in 2024 and 1.6 per cent in 2025.  
At the same time, our past rate increases are being transmitted forcefully to financing conditions and 
are gradually having an impact across the economy. Borrowing costs have increased steeply and 
growth in loans is slowing. Tighter financing conditions are a key reason why inflation is projected to 
decline further towards our target, as they are expected to increasingly dampen demand.  
Our future decisions will ensure that the key ECB interest rates will be brought to levels sufficiently 
restrictive to achieve a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target and will be kept 
at those levels for as long as necessary. We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to 
determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions 
will continue to be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. 
The Governing Council confirms that it will discontinue the reinvestments under the asset purchase 
programme as of July 2023.  
 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.