Financial and monetary conditions
Our monetary policy tightening continues to be reflected in risk-free interest rates and broader 
financing conditions. Funding conditions are tighter for banks and credit is becoming more expensive 
for firms and households. In April lending rates reached their highest level in more than a decade, 
standing at 4.4 per cent for business loans and 3.4 per cent for mortgages.   
 
These higher borrowing rates, together with tighter credit supply conditions and lower loan demand, 
have further weakened credit dynamics. The annual growth of loans to firms declined again in April, to 
4.6 per cent. The month-on-month changes have been negative on average since November. Loans 
to households grew at an annual rate of 2.5 per cent in April and increased only marginally month on 
month. Weak bank lending and the reduction in the Eurosystem balance sheet led to a continued 
decline in annual broad money growth to 1.9 per cent in April. Month-on-month changes in broad 
money have been negative since December. 
In line with our monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council thoroughly assessed the links 
between monetary policy and financial stability. The financial stability outlook has remained 
challenging since our last review in December 2022. Tighter financing conditions are raising banks’ 
funding costs and the credit risk of outstanding loans. Together with the recent tensions in the US 
banking system, these factors could give rise to systemic stress and depress economic growth in the 
short term. Another factor weighing on the resilience of the financial sector is a downturn in the real 
estate markets, which could be amplified by higher borrowing costs and a rise in unemployment. At 
the same time, euro area banks have strong capital and liquidity positions, which mitigate these 
financial stability risks. Macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence against the build-up of 
financial vulnerabilities.