Economic activity
The economy grew by 0.3 per cent in the first quarter of 2025, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. 
Unemployment, at 6.2 per cent in April, is at its lowest level since the launch of the euro, and 
employment grew by 0.3 per cent in the first quarter of the year, according to the flash estimate.  
In line with the staff projections, survey data point overall to some weaker prospects in the near term. 
While manufacturing has strengthened, partly because trade has been brought forward in anticipation 
of higher tariffs, the more domestically oriented services sector is slowing. Higher tariffs and a stronger 
euro are expected to make it harder for firms to export. High uncertainty is expected to weigh on 
investment. 
At the same time, several factors are keeping the economy resilient and should support growth over 
the medium term. A strong labour market, rising real incomes, robust private sector balance sheets 
and easier financing conditions, in part because of our past interest rate cuts, should all help 
consumers and firms withstand the fallout from a volatile global environment. Recently announced 
measures to step up defence and infrastructure investment should also bolster growth.  
In the present geopolitical environment, it is even more urgent for fiscal and structural policies to make 
the euro area economy more productive, competitive and resilient. The European Commission’s 
Competitiveness Compass provides a concrete roadmap for action, and its proposals, including on 
simplification, should be swiftly adopted. This includes completing the savings and investment union, 
following a clear and ambitious timetable. It is also important to rapidly establish the legislative  
 
framework to prepare the ground for the potential introduction of a digital euro. G overnments should 
ensure sustainable public finances in line with the EU’s economic governance framework, while 
prioritising essential growth-enhancing structural reforms and strategic investment.