Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. 
Inflation is currently at around our two per cent medium-term target. In the baseline of the new 
Eurosystem staff projections, headline inflation is set to average 2.0 per cent in 2025, 1.6 per cent in 
2026 and 2.0 per cent in 2027. The downward revisions compared with the March projections, by 0.3 
percentage points for both 2025 and 2026, mainly reflect lower assumptions for energy prices and a 
stronger euro. Staff expect inflation excluding energy and food to average 2.4 per cent in 2025 and 1.9 
per cent in 2026 and 2027, broadly unchanged since March.  
Staff see real GDP growth averaging 0.9 per cent in 2025, 1.1 per cent in 2026 and 1.3 per cent in 
2027. The unrevised growth projection for 2025 reflects a stronger than expected first quarter 
combined with weaker prospects for the remainder of the year. While the uncertainty surrounding 
trade policies is expected to weigh on business investment and exports, especially in the short term, 
rising government investment in defence and infrastructure will increasingly support growth over the 
medium term. Higher real incomes and a robust labour market will allow households to spend more. 
Together with more favourable financing conditions, this should make the economy more resilient to 
global shocks. 
In the context of high uncertainty, staff also assessed some of the mechanisms by which different 
trade policies could affect growth and inflation under some alternative illustrative scenarios. These 
scenarios will be published with the staff projections on our website. Under this scenario analysis, a 
further escalation of trade tensions over the coming months would result in growth and inflation being 
below the baseline projections. By contrast, if trade tensions were resolved with a benign outcome, 
growth and, to a lesser extent, inflation would be higher than in the baseline projections. 
Most measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will settle at around our two per cent 
medium-term target on a sustained basis. Wage growth is still elevated but continues to moderate  
 
visibly, and profits are partially buffering its impact on inflation. The concerns that increased 
uncertainty and a volatile market response to the trade tensions in April would have a tightening 
impact on financing conditions have eased. 
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our two per cent medium- term 
target. Especially in current conditions of exceptional uncertainty, we will follow a data- dependent and 
meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. O ur interest rate 
decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.