Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. 
Based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the 
strength of monetary policy transmission, it is now appropriate to moderate the degree of monetary 
policy restriction after nine months of holding rates steady. Since our meeting in September 2023, 
inflation has fallen by more than 2.5 percentage points and the inflation outlook has improved 
markedly. Underlying inflation has also eased, reinforcing the signs that price pressures have 
weakened, and inflation expectations have declined at all horizons. Monetary policy has kept financing 
conditions restrictive. By dampening demand and keeping inflation expectations well anchored, this 
has made a major contribution to bringing inflation back down.  
At the same time, despite the progress over recent quarters, domestic price pressures remain strong 
as wage growth is elevated, and inflation is likely to stay above target well into next year. The latest 
Eurosystem staff projections for both headline and core inflation have been revised up for 2024 and 
2025 compared with the March projections. Staff now see headline inflation averaging 2.5 per cent in 
2024, 2.2 per cent in 2025 and 1.9 per cent in 2026. For inflation excluding energy and food, staff 
project an average of 2.8 per cent in 2024, 2.2 per cent in 2025 and 2.0 per cent in 2026. Economic 
growth is expected to pick up to 0.9 per cent in 2024, 1.4 per cent in 2025 and 1.6 per cent in 2026.  
We are determined to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner. We will keep policy rates sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary to achieve this aim. 
We will continue to follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisi ons will be based on 
our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the 
dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  We are not pre-
committing to a particular rate path.  
The Governing Council today also confirmed that it will reduce the Eurosystem’s holdings of securities 
under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) by €7.5 billion per month on average  
 
over the second half of the year. The modalities for reducing the PEPP holdings will be broadly in line 
with those followed under the asset purchase programme (APP). 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.