Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
Inflation continues to decline but is still expected to remain too high for too long. We are determined to 
ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely manner. In order to 
reinforce progress towards our target, the Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB 
interest rates by 25 basis points. 
The rate increase today reflects our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming 
economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. The September ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area see average 
inflation at 5.6 per cent in 2023, 3.2 per cent in 2024 and 2.1 per cent in 2025. This is an upward 
revision for 2023 and 2024 and a downward revision for 2025. The upward revision for 2023 and 2024 
mainly reflects a higher path for energy prices. Underlying price pressures remain high, even though 
most indicators have started to ease. ECB staff have slightly revised down the projected path for 
inflation excluding energy and food, to an average of 5.1 per cent in 2023, 2.9 per cent in 2024 and 
2.2 per cent in 2025. Our past interest rate increases continue to be transmitted forcefully. Financing 
conditions have tightened further and are increasingly dampening demand, which is an important 
factor in bringing inflation back to target. With the increasing impact of our tightening on domestic 
demand and the weakening international trade environment, ECB staff have lowered their economic 
growth projections significantly. They now expect the euro area economy to expand by 0.7 per cent in 
2023, 1.0 per cent in 2024 and 1.5 per cent in 2025.  
Based on our current assessment, we consider that the key ECB interest rates have reached levels 
that, maintained for a sufficiently long duration, will make a substantial contribution to the timely return 
of inflation to our target. Our future decisions will ensure that the key ECB interest rates will be set at 
sufficiently restrictive levels for as long as necessary. We will continue to follow a data- dependent 
approach to determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate 
decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic 
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission.  
 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.