Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. I would like to thank 
President Knot for his kind hospitality and express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent 
organisation of today’s meeting of the Governing Council. 
High inflation is a major challenge for all of us. The Governing Council will make sure that inflation 
returns to our two per cent target over the medium term. 
In May inflation again rose significantly, mainly because of surging energy and food prices, including 
due to the impact of the war. But inflation pressures have broadened and intensified, with prices for 
many goods and services increasing strongly. Eurosystem staff have revised their baseline inflation 
projections up significantly. These projections indicate that inflation will remain undesirably elevated 
for some time. However, moderating energy costs, the easing of supply disruptions related to the 
pandemic and the normalisation of monetary policy are expected to lead to a decline in inflation. The 
new staff projections foresee annual inflation at 6.8 per cent in 2022, before it is projected to decline to 
3.5 per cent in 2023 and 2.1 per cent in 2024 – higher than in the March projections. This means that 
headline inflation at the end of the projection horizon is projected to be slightly above our target. 
Inflation excluding energy and food is projected to average 3.3 per cent in 2022, 2.8 per cent in 2023 
and 2.3 per cent in 2024 – also above the March projections.  
Russia’s unjustified aggression towards Ukraine continues to weigh on the economy in Europe and 
beyond. It is disrupting trade, is leading to shortages of materials and is contributing to high energy 
and commodity prices. These factors will continue to weigh on confidence and dampen growth, 
especially in the near term. However, the conditions are in place for the economy to continue to grow 
on account of the ongoing reopening of the economy, a strong labour market, fiscal support and 
savings built up during the pandemic. Once current headwinds abate, economic activity is expected to 
pick up again. This outlook is broadly reflected in the Eurosystem staff projections, which foresee 
annual real GDP growth at 2.8 per cent in 2022, 2.1 per cent in 2023 and 2.1 per cent in 2024. 
Compared with the March projections, the outlook has been revised down significantly for 2022 and 
2023, while for 2024 it has been revised up.  
 
On the basis of our updated assessment, we decided to take further steps in normalising our monetary 
policy. Throughout this process, the Governing Council will maintain optionality, data-dependence, 
gradualism and flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy.  
First, we decided to end net asset purchases under our asset purchase programme (APP) as of 1 July 
2022. The Governing Council intends to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from 
maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when it 
starts raising the key ECB interest rates and, in any case, for as long as necessary to maintain ample 
liquidity conditions and an appropriate monetary policy stance. 
Second, we undertook a careful review of the conditions which, according to our forward guidance, 
should be satisfied before we start raising the key ECB interest rates. As a result of this assessment, 
the Governing Council concluded that those conditions have been satisfied. Accordingly, and in line 
with our policy sequencing, we intend to raise the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points at our July 
monetary policy meeting.  
Looking further ahead, we expect to raise the key ECB interest rates again in September. The 
calibration of this rate increase will depend on the updated medium-term inflation outlook. If the 
medium-term inflation outlook persists or deteriorates, a larger increment will be appropriate at our 
September meeting.   
Third, beyond September, based on our current assessment, we anticipate that a gradual but 
sustained path of further increases in interest rates will be appropriate. In line with our commitment to 
our two per cent medium-term target, the pace at which we adjust our monetary policy will depend on 
the incoming data and how we assess inflation to develop in the medium term.  
Within the Governing Council’s mandate, under stressed conditions, flexibility will remain an element 
of monetary policy whenever threats to monetary policy transmission jeopardise the attainment of 
price stability. 
The decisions taken today are set out in full in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing , and will then 
explain our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.