Economic activity
The euro area economy grew by 0.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2022, mainly owing to strong 
consumer spending on contact-intensive services, as a result of the lifting of pandemic-related 
restrictions. Over the summer, as people travelled more, countries with large tourism sectors benefited 
especially. At the same time, businesses suffered from high energy costs and continued supply 
bottlenecks, although the latter have been gradually easing.  
While buoyant tourism has been supporting economic growth during the third quarter, we expect the 
economy to slow down substantially over the remainder of this year. There are four main reasons 
behind this. First, high inflation is dampening spending and production throughout the economy, and 
these headwinds are reinforced by gas supply disruptions. Second, the strong rebound in demand for 
services that came with the reopening of the economy will lose steam in the coming months. Third, the 
weakening in global demand, also in the context of tighter monetary policy in many major economies, 
and the worsening terms of trade will mean less support for the euro area economy. Fourth, 
uncertainty remains high and confidence is falling sharply. 
At the same time, the labour market has remained robust, supporting economic activity. Employment 
increased by more than 600,000 people in the second quarter of 2022 and the unemployment rate 
stood at a historical low of 6.6 per cent in July. Total hours worked increased further, by 0.6 per cent, 
in the second quarter of 2022 and have surpassed their pre-pandemic levels. Looking ahead, the 
slowing economy is likely to lead to some increase in the unemployment rate. 
Fiscal support measures to cushion the impact of higher energy prices should be temporary and 
targeted at the most vulnerable households and firms to limit the risk of fuelling inflationary pressures , 
to enhance the efficiency of public spending and to preserve debt sustainability. Structural policies 
should aim at raising the euro area’s growth potential and supporting its resilience. Inflation 
Inflation rose further to 9.1 per cent in August. Energy price inflation remained extremely elevated, at 
38.3 per cent, and it was again the dominant component of overall inflation. Market-based indicators 
suggest that, in the near term, oil prices will moderate, while wholesale gas prices will stay 
extraordinarily high. Food price inflation also rose in August, to 10.6 per cent, partly reflecting higher 
input costs related to energy, disruptions of trade in food commodities and adverse weather 
conditions. 
While supply bottlenecks have been easing, these continue to gradually feed through to consumer 
prices and are putting upward pressure on inflation, as is recovering demand in the services sector. 
The depreciation of the euro has also added to the build-up of inflationary pressures. 
Price pressures are spreading across more and more sectors, in part owing to the impact of  high 
energy costs across the whole economy. Accordingly, measures of underlying inflation remain at 
elevated levels and the latest staff projections see inflation excluding food and energy reaching 3.9 per 
cent in 2022, 3.4 per cent in 2023 and 2.3 per cent in 2024.  
Resilient labour markets and some catch-up to compensate for higher inflation are likely to support 
growth in wages. At the same time, incoming data and recent wage agreements indicate that wage 
dynamics remain contained overall. Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations currently 
stand at around two per cent, although recent above-target revisions to some indicators warrant 
continued monitoring.