Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.  
The Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 75 basis points. 
This major step frontloads the transition from the prevailing highly accommodative level of policy rates 
towards levels that will ensure the timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term target. 
Based on our current assessment, over the next several meetings we expect to raise interest rates 
further to dampen demand and guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation 
expectations. We will regularly re-evaluate our policy path in light of incoming information and the 
evolving inflation outlook. Our future policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent and 
follow a meeting-by-meeting approach. 
We took today’s decision, and expect to raise interest rates further, because inflation remains far too 
high and is likely to stay above our target for an extended period. According to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate, inflation reached 9.1 per cent in August. Soaring energy and food prices, demand pressures 
in some sectors owing to the reopening of the economy, and supply bottlenecks are still driving up 
inflation. Price pressures have continued to strengthen and broaden across the economy and inflation 
may rise further in the near term. As the current drivers of inflation fade over time and the 
normalisation of our monetary policy works its way through to the economy and price-setting, inflation 
will come down. Looking ahead, ECB staff have significantly revised up their inflation projections and 
inflation is now expected to average 8.1 per cent in 2022, 5.5 per cent in 2023 and 2.3 per cent in 
2024.  
After a rebound in the first half of 2022, recent data point to a substantial slowdown in euro area 
economic growth, with the economy expected to stagnate later in the year and in the first quarter of 
2023. Very high energy prices are reducing the purchasing power of people’s incomes and, although 
supply bottlenecks are easing, they are still constraining economic activity. In addition, the adverse 
geopolitical situation, especially Russia’s unjustified aggression towards Ukraine, is weighing on the 
confidence of businesses and consumers. This outlook is reflected in the latest staff projections for 
economic growth, which have been revised down markedly for the remainder of the current year and 
throughout 2023. Staff now expect the economy to grow by 3.1 per cent in 2022, 0.9 per cent in 2023 
and 1.9 per cent in 2024.  The lasting vulnerabilities caused by the pandemic still pose a risk to the smooth transmission of our 
monetary policy. The Governing Council will therefore continue applying flexibility in reinvesting 
redemptions coming due in the pandemic emergency purchase programme portfolio, with a view to 
countering risks to the transmission mechanism related to the pandemic.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  A separate 
technical press release on the remuneration of government deposits will be published at 15:45 CET. 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.