Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we 
steer the monetary policy stance – by 25 basis points. Based on our updated assessment of the 
inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary  policy transmission, 
it is now appropriate to take another step in moderating the degree of monetary policy restriction.  
Recent inflation data have come in broadly as expected, and the latest ECB staff projections confirm 
the previous inflation outlook. Staff see headline inflation averaging 2.5 per cent in 2024, 2.2 per cent 
in 2025 and 1.9 per cent in 2026, as in the June projections. Inflation is expected to rise again in the 
latter part of this year, partly because previous sharp falls in energy prices will drop out of the annual 
rates. Inflation should then decline towards our target over the second half of next year. For core 
inflation, the projections for 2024 and 2025 have been revised up slightly, as services inflation has 
been higher than expected. At the same time, staff continue to expect a rapid decline in core inflation, 
from 2.9 per cent this year to 2.3 per cent in 2025 and 2.0 per cent in 2026.  
Domestic inflation remains high as wages are still rising at an elevated pace. However, labour cost 
pressures are moderating, and profits are partially buffering the impact of higher wages on inflation. 
Financing conditions remain restrictive, and economic activity is still subdued, reflecting weak private 
consumption and investment. Staff project that the economy will grow by 0.8 per cent in 2024, rising to 
1.3 per cent in 2025 and 1.5 per cent in 2026. This is a slight downward revision compared with the 
June projections, mainly owing to a weaker contribution from domestic demand over the next few 
quarters. 
We are determined to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner. We will keep policy rates sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary to achieve this aim. 
We will continue to follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on 
our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the 
dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-
committing to a particular rate path.   
 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  As announced on 
13 March 2024, some changes to the operational framework for implementing monetary policy  will 
take effect from 18 September. In particular, the spread between the interest rate on the main 
refinancing operations and the deposit facility rate will be set at 15 basis points. The spread between 
the rate on the marginal lending facility and the rate on the main refinancing operations will remain 
unchanged at 25 basis points. 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.