 
 
European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 
 
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 
 
Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 
17 October 2024  
Monetary policy decisions 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which the Governing Council 
steers the monetary policy stance – is based on its updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the 
dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission . The incoming 
information on inflation shows that the disinflationary process is well on track. The inflation outlook is 
also affected by recent downside surprises in indicators of economic activity. Meanwhile, financing 
conditions remain restrictive. 
Inflation is expected to rise in the coming months, before declining to target in the course of next year. 
Domestic inflation remains high, as wages are still rising at an elevated pace. At the same time, labour 
cost pressures are set to continue easing gradually, with profits partially buffering their impact on 
inflation.  
The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation returns to its 2% medium- term target in a 
timely manner. It will keep policy rates sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary to achieve this 
aim. The Governing Council will continue to follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting 
approach to determining the appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, its interest rate 
decisions will be based on its assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and 
financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. 
The Governing Council is not pre-committing to a particular rate path.  
 
Key ECB interest rates 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. 
Accordingly, the interest rates on the deposit facility, the main refinancing operations and the marginal 
lending facility will be decreased to 3.25%, 3.40% and 3.65% respectively, with effect from 23 October 
2024. 
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 
The APP portfolio is declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem no longer 
reinvests the principal payments from maturing securities. 
The Eurosystem no longer reinvests all of the principal payments from maturing securities purchased 
under the PEPP, reducing the PEPP portfolio by €7.5 billion per month on average. The Governing 
Council intends to discontinue reinvestments under the PEPP at the end of 2024.  
The Governing Council will continue applying flexibility in reinvesting redemptions coming due in the 
PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related 
to the pandemic. 
Refinancing operations 
As banks are repaying the amounts borrowed under the targeted longer-term refinancing operations, 
the Governing Council will regularly assess how targeted lending operations and their ongoing 
repayment are contributing to its monetary policy stance.  
*** 
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that 
inflation returns to its 2% target over the medium term and to preserve the smooth functioning of 
monetary policy transmission. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is available to 
counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the transmission of 
monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to more effectively 
deliver on its price stability mandate. 
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 
conference starting at 14:45 CET today.  
 
Monetary policy statement 
Press conference 
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. I would like to thank 
Governor Vasle for his kind hospitality and express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent 
organisation of today’s meeting of the Governing Council. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. The incoming information on 
inflation shows that the disinflationary process is well on track. The inflation outlook is also affected by 
recent downside surprises in indicators of economic activity. Meanwhile, financing conditions remain 
restrictive. 
Inflation is expected to rise in the coming months, before declining to target in the course of next year. 
Domestic inflation remains high, as wages are still rising at an elevated pace. At the same time, labour 
cost pressures are set to continue easing gradually, with profits partially buffering their impact on 
inflation. 
We are determined to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner. We will keep policy rates sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary to achieve this aim. 
We will continue to follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on 
our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the 
dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-
committing to a particular rate path. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then expl ain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.  
 
Economic activity 
The incoming information suggests that economic activity has been somewhat weaker than expected. 
While industrial production has been particularly volatile over the summer months, s urveys indicate 
that manufacturing has continued to contract. For services, surveys show an uptick in August, likely 
supported by a strong summer tourism season, but the latest data point to more sluggish growth. 
Businesses are expanding their investment only slowly, while housing investment continues to fall. 
Exports have weakened, especially for goods. 
Although incomes rose in the second quarter, households consumed less, contrary to expectations. 
The saving rate stood at 15.7 per cent in the second quarter, well above the pre-pandemic average of 
12.9 per cent. At the same time, recent survey evidence points to a gradual recovery in household 
spending. 
The labour market remains resilient. The unemployment rate stayed at its historical low of 6.4 per cent 
in August. However, surveys point to slowing employment growth and a further moderation in the 
demand for labour. 
We expect the economy to strengthen over time, as rising real incomes allow households to consume 
more. The gradually fading effects of restrictive monetary policy should support consumption and 
investment. Exports should contribute to the recovery as global demand rises. 
Fiscal and structural policies should be aimed at making the economy more productive,  competitive 
and resilient. That would help to raise potential growth and reduce price pressures in the medium 
term. To this end, it is crucial to swiftly follow up, with concrete and ambitious structural policies, on 
Mario Draghi's proposals for enhancing European competitiveness and Enrico Letta’s proposals for 
empowering the Single Market. Implementing the EU’s revised economic governance framework fully, 
transparently and without delay will help governments bring down budget deficits and debt  ratios on a 
sustained basis. Governments should now make a strong start in this direction in their medium- term 
plans for fiscal and structural policies.  
Inflation 
Annual inflation fell further to 1.7 per cent in September, its lowest level since April 2021. Energy 
prices dropped sharply, at an annual rate of -6.1 per cent. Food price inflation went up slightly, to 2.4 
per cent. Goods inflation remained subdued, at 0.4 per cent, while services inflation edged down to 
3.9 per cent.   
 
Most measures of underlying inflation either declined or were unchanged. Domestic inflation is still 
elevated, as wage pressures in the euro area remain strong. Negotiated wage growth will remain high 
and volatile for the rest of the year, given the significant role of one-off payments and the staggered 
nature of wage adjustments.  
Inflation is expected to rise in the coming months, partly because previous sharp falls in energy prices 
will drop out of the annual rates. Inflation should then decline to target in the course of next year. The 
disinflation process should be supported by easing labour cost pressures and the past monetary policy 
tightening gradually feeding through to consumer prices. Most measures of longer -term inflation 
expectations stand at around 2 per cent. 
Risk assessment  
The risks to economic growth remain tilted to the downside. Lower confidence could prevent 
consumption and investment from recovering as fast as expected. This could be amplified by sources 
of geopolitical risk, such as Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and the tragic conflict in the 
Middle East, which could also disrupt energy supplies and global trade. Lower demand for euro area 
exports due, for instance, to a weaker world economy or an escalation in trade tensions between 
major economies would further weigh on euro area growth. Growth could also be lower if the lagged 
effects of monetary policy tightening turn out stronger than expected. Growth could be higher if the 
world economy grows more strongly than expected or if easier financing conditions  and declining 
inflation lead to a faster rebound in consumption and investment. 
Inflation could turn out higher than anticipated if wages or profits increase by more than expected. 
Upside risks to inflation also stem from the heightened geopolitical tensions, which could push energy 
prices and freight costs higher in the near term and disrupt global trade. Moreover, extreme weather 
events, and the unfolding climate crisis more broadly, could drive up food prices. By contrast, inflation 
may surprise on the downside if low confidence and concerns about geopolitical events prevent 
consumption and investment from recovering as fast as expected, monetary policy dampens demand 
more than expected, or if the economic environment in the rest of the world worsens unexpectedly.  
Financial and monetary conditions 
Shorter-term market interest rates have declined since our September meeting, owing mainly to 
weaker news on the euro area economy and the further fall in inflation. While financing conditions 
remain restrictive, the average interest rates on new loans to firms and on new mortgages were down 
slightly in August, to 5.0 per cent and 3.7 per cent respectively.  
 
Credit standards for business loans were unchanged in the third quarter, as reported in our latest bank 
lending survey, after more than two years of progressive tightening. Moreover, demand for loans by 
firms rose for the first time in two years. Overall lending to firms continues to be subdued, growing at 
an annual rate of 0.8 per cent in August. 
Credit standards for mortgages eased for the third quarter in a row, owing especially to greater 
competition among banks. Lower interest rates and better housing market prospects led to a strong 
increase in the demand for mortgages. In line with this, mortgage lending picked up slightly, growing at 
an annual rate of 0.6 per cent. 
Conclusion  
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are determined to ensure 
that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely manner. We will keep policy 
rates sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary to achieve this aim. We will continue to follow a 
data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate level and duration 
of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation 
outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and 
the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.  
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation 
returns to our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary policy 
transmission. 
We are now ready to take your questions. 
 