Economic activity
The incoming information suggests that economic activity has been somewhat weaker than expected. 
While industrial production has been particularly volatile over the summer months, s urveys indicate 
that manufacturing has continued to contract. For services, surveys show an uptick in August, likely 
supported by a strong summer tourism season, but the latest data point to more sluggish growth. 
Businesses are expanding their investment only slowly, while housing investment continues to fall. 
Exports have weakened, especially for goods. 
Although incomes rose in the second quarter, households consumed less, contrary to expectations. 
The saving rate stood at 15.7 per cent in the second quarter, well above the pre-pandemic average of 
12.9 per cent. At the same time, recent survey evidence points to a gradual recovery in household 
spending. 
The labour market remains resilient. The unemployment rate stayed at its historical low of 6.4 per cent 
in August. However, surveys point to slowing employment growth and a further moderation in the 
demand for labour. 
We expect the economy to strengthen over time, as rising real incomes allow households to consume 
more. The gradually fading effects of restrictive monetary policy should support consumption and 
investment. Exports should contribute to the recovery as global demand rises. 
Fiscal and structural policies should be aimed at making the economy more productive,  competitive 
and resilient. That would help to raise potential growth and reduce price pressures in the medium 
term. To this end, it is crucial to swiftly follow up, with concrete and ambitious structural policies, on 
Mario Draghi's proposals for enhancing European competitiveness and Enrico Letta’s proposals for 
empowering the Single Market. Implementing the EU’s revised economic governance framework fully, 
transparently and without delay will help governments bring down budget deficits and debt  ratios on a 
sustained basis. Governments should now make a strong start in this direction in their medium- term 
plans for fiscal and structural policies.