Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. I would like to thank 
Governor Vasle for his kind hospitality and express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent 
organisation of today’s meeting of the Governing Council. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. The incoming information on 
inflation shows that the disinflationary process is well on track. The inflation outlook is also affected by 
recent downside surprises in indicators of economic activity. Meanwhile, financing conditions remain 
restrictive. 
Inflation is expected to rise in the coming months, before declining to target in the course of next year. 
Domestic inflation remains high, as wages are still rising at an elevated pace. At the same time, labour 
cost pressures are set to continue easing gradually, with profits partially buffering their impact on 
inflation. 
We are determined to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner. We will keep policy rates sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary to achieve this aim. 
We will continue to follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate level and duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on 
our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the 
dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-
committing to a particular rate path. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then expl ain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.