Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
Inflation continues to decline but is still expected to remain too high for too long. We are determined to 
ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely manner. The Governing 
Council therefore today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points.  
The rate increase today reflects our assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying 
inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission. The developments since our last meeting 
support our expectation that inflation will drop further over the remainder of the year but will stay 
above target for an extended period. While some measures show signs of easing, underlying inflation 
remains high overall. Our past rate increases continue to be transmitted forcefully: financing conditions 
have tightened again and are increasingly dampening demand, which is an important factor in bringing 
inflation back to target. 
Our future decisions will ensure that the key ECB interest rates will be set at sufficiently restrictive 
levels for as long as necessary to achieve a timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium- term 
target. We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to determining the appropriate level and 
duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions will continue to be based on our 
assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics 
of underlying inflation, and the strength of monetary policy transmission. 
We also decided to set the remuneration of minimum reserves at zero per cent. This decision will 
preserve the effectiveness of monetary policy by maintaining the current degree of control over the 
monetary policy stance and ensuring the full pass-through of our interest rate decisions to money 
markets. At the same time, it will improve the efficiency of monetary policy by reducing the overall 
amount of interest that needs to be paid on reserves in order to implement the appropriate stance. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. The details of the 
change to the remuneration of minimum reserves are provided in a separate press release to be 
published at 15:45 CET.  
 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.