Economic activity
Economic activity in the euro area is likely to have slowed significantly in the third quarter of the year, 
and we expect a further weakening in the remainder of this year and the beginning of next year. By 
reducing people’s real incomes and pushing up costs for firms, high inflation continues to dampen 
spending and production. Severe disruptions in the supply of gas have worsened the situation further, 
and both consumer and business confidence have fallen rapidly, which is also weighing on the 
economy. Demand for services is slowing, after a strong performance in previous quarters when those 
sectors most affected by the pandemic-related restrictions reopened, and survey-based indicators for 
new orders in the manufacturing sector are falling. Moreover, global economic activity is growing more 
slowly, in a context of persistent geopolitical uncertainty, especially owing to Russia’s unjustified war 
against Ukraine, and tighter financing conditions. Worsening terms of trade, as the prices paid for 
imports rise faster than those received for exports, are weighing on incomes in the euro area.  
The labour market continued to perform well in the third quarter, and the unemployment rate remained 
at the historically low level of 6.6 per cent in August. While short-term indicators suggest that jobs 
were still being created in the third quarter, the weakening of the economy could lead to somewhat 
higher unemployment in the future.  
To limit the risk of fuelling inflation, fiscal support measures to shield the economy from the impact of 
high energy prices should be temporary and targeted at the most vulnerable. Policymakers should 
provide incentives to lower energy consumption and bolster energy supply. At the same time, 
governments should pursue fiscal policies that show they are committed to gradually bringing down 
high public debt ratios. Structural policies should be designed to increase the euro area’s growth 
potential and supply capacity and to boost its resilience, thereby contributing to a reduction in medium-
term price pressures. The swift implementation of the investment and structural reform plans under the 
Next Generation EU programme will make an important contribution to these objectives.