Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.  
The Governing Council today decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 75 basis points. 
With this third major policy rate increase in a row, we have made substantial progress in withdrawing 
monetary policy accommodation. We took today’s decision, and expect to raise interest rates further, 
to ensure the timely return of inflation to our two per cent medium-term inflation target. We will base 
the future policy rate path on the evolving outlook for inflation and the economy, following our meeting-
by-meeting approach.  
Inflation remains far too high and will stay above our target for an extended period. In September, euro 
area inflation reached 9.9 per cent. In recent months, soaring energy and food prices, supply 
bottlenecks and the post-pandemic recovery in demand have led to a broadening of price pressures 
and an increase in inflation. Our monetary policy is aimed at reducing support for demand and 
guarding against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation expectations. 
The Governing Council also decided to change the terms and conditions of the third series of targeted 
longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III). During the acute phase of the pandemic, this 
instrument played a key role in countering downside risks to price stability. Today, in view of the 
unexpected and extraordinary rise in inflation, it needs to be recalibrated to ensure that it is consistent 
with the broader monetary policy normalisation process and to reinforce the transmission of our policy 
rate increases to bank lending conditions. We therefore decided to adjust the interest rates applicable 
to TLTRO III from 23 November 2022 and to offer banks additional voluntary early repayment dates.  
Finally, in order to align the remuneration of minimum reserves held by credit institutions with the 
Eurosystem more closely with money market conditions, we decided to set the remuneration of 
minimum reserves at the ECB’s deposit facility rate. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. The details of the 
changes to the TLTRO III terms and conditions are described in a separate press release to be 
published at 15:45 CET. Another technical press release, detailing the change to the remuneration of 
minimum reserves, will also be published at 15:45 CET.  
 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.