Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.  
Today, in line with our strong commitment to our price stability mandate, the Governing Council took 
further key steps to make sure inflation returns to our two per cent target over the medium term. We 
decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points and approved the Transmission 
Protection Instrument (TPI).  
The Governing Council judged that it is appropriate to take a larger first step on its policy rate 
normalisation path than signalled at its previous meeting. This decision is based on our updated 
assessment of inflation risks and the reinforced support provided by the TPI for the effective 
transmission of monetary policy. It will support the return of inflation to our medium-term target by 
strengthening the anchoring of inflation expectations and by ensuring that demand conditions adjust to 
deliver our inflation target in the medium term. 
At our upcoming meetings, further normalisation of interest rates will be appropriate. The frontloading 
today of the exit from negative interest rates allows us to make a transition to a meeting-by-meeting 
approach to our interest rate decisions. Our future policy rate path will continue to be data-dependent 
and will help us deliver on our two per cent inflation target over the medium term. In the context of our 
policy normalisation, we will evaluate options for remunerating excess liquidity holdings .  
We assessed that the establishment of the TPI is necessary to support the effective transmission of 
monetary policy. In particular, as we continue normalising monetary policy, the TPI will ensure that our 
monetary policy stance is transmitted smoothly across all euro area countries. The singleness of our 
monetary policy is a precondition for the ECB to be able to deliver on its price stability mandate.  
The TPI will be an addition to our toolkit and can be activated to counter unwarranted, disorderly 
market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the transmission of monetary policy across the euro 
area. The scale of TPI purchases depends on the severity of the risks facing policy transmission. 
Purchases are not restricted ex ante. By safeguarding the transmission mechanism, the TPI will allow 
the Governing Council to more effectively deliver on its price stability mandate.  
 
In any event, the flexibility in reinvestments of redemptions coming due in the pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) portfolio remains the first line of defence to counter risks to the 
transmission mechanism related to the pandemic.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. The details of the 
TPI are described in a separate press release to be published at 15:45 CET. 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.