Economic activity
The euro area economy remains weak. Recent information suggests that manufacturing output has
continued to fall. Subdued foreign demand and tighter financing conditions are increasingly weighing
on investment and consumer spending. The services sector is also weakening further. This is mainly
because weaker industrial activity is spilling over to other sectors, the impetus from reopening effects
is fading and the impact of higher interest rates is broadening. The economy is likely to remain weak
Jump to the transcript of the questions and answers
press release
20.06.25, 14:49 PRESS CONFERENCE
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/press_conference/monetary-policy-statement/2023/html/ecb.is231026~c23b4eb5f0.en.html 1/11for the remainder of this year. But as inflation falls further, household real incomes recover and the
demand for euro area exports picks up, the economy should strengthen over the coming years.
Economic activity has so far been supported by the strength of the labour market. The unemployment
rate stood at a historical low of 6.4 per cent in August. At the same time, there are signs that the labour
market is weakening. Fewer new jobs are being created, including in services, consistent with the
cooling economy gradually feeding through to employment.
As the energy crisis fades, governments should continue to roll back the related support measures.
This is essential to avoid driving up medium-term inflationary pressures, which would otherwise call for
even tighter monetary policy. Fiscal policies should be designed to make our economy more
productive and to gradually bring down high public debt. Structural reforms and investments to
enhance the euro area’s supply capacity – which would be supported by the full implementation of the
Next Generation EU programme – can help reduce price pressures in the medium term, while
supporting the green and digital transitions. To that end, the reform of the EU’s economic governance
framework should be concluded before the end of this year and progress towards Capital Markets
Union and the completion of Banking Union should be accelerated.