Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. 
The disinflation process is well on track. Inflation has continued to develop as staff expected, with both 
headline and core inflation declining in March. Services inflation has also eased markedly over recent 
months. Most measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will settle at around our two per 
cent medium-term target on a sustained basis. Wage growth is moderating, and profits are partially 
buffering the impact of still elevated wage growth on inflation. The euro area economy has been 
building up some resilience against global shocks, but the outlook for growth has deteriorated owing to 
rising trade tensions. Increased uncertainty is likely to reduce confidence among households and 
firms, and the adverse and volatile market response to the trade tensions is likely to have a tightening 
impact on financing conditions. These factors may further weigh on the economic outlook for the euro 
area.  
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our two per cent medium- term 
target. Especially in current conditions of exceptional uncertainty, we will follow a data-dependent and 
meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, our 
interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming 
economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy 
transmission. We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.  
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.