 
 
European Central Bank 
Directorate General Communications 
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu 
 
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. 
 
Combined monetary policy decisions and 
statement 
30 January 2025 
Monetary policy decisions 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which the Governing Council 
steers the monetary policy stance – is based on its updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the 
dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The disinflation process is well on track. Inflation has continued to develop broadly in line with the staff 
projections and is set to return to the Governing Council’s 2% medium-term target in the course of this 
year. Most measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will settle at around the target on a 
sustained basis. Domestic inflation remains high, mostly because wages and prices in certain sectors 
are still adjusting to the past inflation surge with a substantial delay. But wage growth is moderating as 
expected, and profits are partially buffering the impact on inflation. 
The Governing Council’s recent interest rate cuts are gradually making new borrowing less expensive 
for firms and households. At the same time, financing conditions continue to be tight, also because 
monetary policy remains restrictive and past interest rate hikes are still transmitting to the stock of 
credit, with some maturing loans being rolled over at higher rates. The economy is still facing 
headwinds but rising real incomes and the gradually fading effects of restrictive monetary policy 
should support a pick-up in demand over time.  
The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at its 2% medium-
term target. It will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, the Governing Council’s interest rate decisions will 
be based on its assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial 
data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. The 
Governing Council is not pre-committing to a particular rate path.  
 
Key ECB interest rates 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. 
Accordingly, the interest rates on the deposit facility, the main refinancing operations and the marginal 
lending facility will be decreased to 2.75%, 2.90% and 3.15% respectively, with effect from 5 February 
2025. 
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency 
purchase programme (PEPP) 
The APP and PEPP portfolios are declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem 
no longer reinvests the principal payments from maturing securities. 
Refinancing operations 
On 18 December 2024 banks repaid the remaining amounts borrowed under the targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations, thus concluding this part of the balance sheet normalisation process.  
*** 
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that 
inflation stabilises sustainably at its 2% target over the medium term and to preserve the smooth 
functioning of monetary policy transmission. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is 
available to counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the 
transmission of monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to 
more effectively deliver on its price stability mandate. 
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press 
conference starting at 14:45 CET today. 
   
 
Monetary policy statement 
Press conference 
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The disinflation process is well on track. Inflation has continued to develop broadly in line with the staff 
projections and is set to return to our two per cent medium-term target in the course of this year. Most 
measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will settle at around our target on a sustained 
basis. Domestic inflation remains high, mostly because wages and prices in certain sectors are still 
adjusting to the past inflation surge with a substantial delay. But wage growth is moderating as 
expected, and profits are partially buffering the impact on inflation. 
Our recent interest rate cuts are gradually making new borrowing less expensive for firms and 
households. At the same time, financing conditions continue to be tight, also because our monetary 
policy remains restrictive and past interest rate hikes are still transmitting to the stock of credit , with 
some maturing loans being rolled over at higher rates. The economy is still facing headwinds but rising 
real incomes and the gradually fading effects of restrictive monetary policy should support a pick -up in 
demand over time.  
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our two per cent medium-term 
target. We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our 
assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics 
of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre- committing to 
a particular rate path. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.  
 
Economic activity 
The economy stagnated in the fourth quarter, according to Eurostat’s preliminary flash estimate. It is 
set to remain weak in the near term. Surveys indicate that manufacturing continues to contract while 
services activity is expanding. Consumer confidence is fragile, and households have not yet drawn 
sufficient encouragement from rising real incomes to significantly increase their spending.  
Nevertheless, the conditions for a recovery remain in place. While the labour market has softened 
over recent months it continues to be robust, with the unemployment rate staying low, at 6.3 per cent 
in December. A solid job market and higher incomes should strengthen consumer confidence and 
allow spending to rise. More affordable credit should also boost consumption and investment over 
time. Provided trade tensions do not escalate, exports should support the recovery as global demand 
rises. 
Fiscal and structural policies should make the economy more productive, competitive and resilient. We 
welcome the European Commission’s Competitiveness Compass, which provides a concrete roadmap 
for action. It is crucial to follow up, with further concrete and ambitious structural policies, on Mario 
Draghi’s proposals for enhancing European competitiveness and on Enrico Letta’s proposals for 
empowering the Single Market. Governments should implement their commitments under the EU’s 
economic governance framework fully and without delay. This will help bring down budget deficits and 
debt ratios on a sustained basis, while prioritising growth-enhancing reforms and investment. 
Inflation 
Annual inflation increased to 2.4 per cent in December, up from 2.2 per cent in November. As in the 
previous two months, the increase was expected and primarily reflected past sharp drops in energy 
prices falling out of the calculation. Along with a month-on-month increase in December, this led 
energy prices slightly higher on an annual basis, after four consecutive declines. Food price inflation 
edged down to 2.6 per cent and goods inflation to 0.5 per cent. Services inflation edged up to 4.0 per 
cent. 
Most underlying inflation indicators have been developing in line with a sustained return of inflation to 
our medium-term target. Domestic inflation, which closely tracks services inflation, has remained high, 
as wages and some services prices are still adjusting to the past inflation surge with a substantial 
delay. At the same time, recent signals point to continued moderation in wage pressures and to the 
buffering role of profits. 
We expect inflation to fluctuate around its current level in the near term. It should then settle 
sustainably at around the two per cent medium-term target. Easing labour cost pressures and the  
 
continuing impact of our past monetary policy tightening on consumer prices should help this process. 
While market-based indicators of inflation compensation have largely reversed the declines observed 
in the autumn, most measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2 per 
cent. 
Risk assessment  
The risks to economic growth remain tilted to the downside. Greater friction in global trade could weigh 
on euro area growth by dampening exports and weakening the global economy. Lower confidence 
could prevent consumption and investment from recovering as fast as expected. This could be 
amplified by geopolitical risks, such as Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine and the tragic conflict  
in the Middle East, which could disrupt energy supplies and further weigh on global trade. Growth 
could also be lower if the lagged effects of monetary policy tightening last longer than expected. It 
could be higher if easier financing conditions and falling inflation allow domestic consumption and 
investment to rebound faster. 
Inflation could turn out higher if wages or profits increase by more than expected. Upside risks to 
inflation also stem from the heightened geopolitical tensions, which could push energy prices and 
freight costs higher in the near term and disrupt global trade. Moreover, extreme weather events, and 
the unfolding climate crisis more broadly, could drive up food prices by more than expected. By 
contrast, inflation may surprise on the downside if low confidence and concerns about geopolitical 
events prevent consumption and investment from recovering as fast as expected, if monetary policy 
dampens demand by more than expected, or if the economic environment in the rest of the world 
worsens unexpectedly. Greater friction in global trade would make the euro area inflation outlook more 
uncertain. 
Financial and monetary conditions 
Market interest rates in the euro area have risen since our December meeting, partly mirroring higher 
rates in global financial markets. While financing conditions remain tight, our interest rate cuts are 
gradually making it less expensive for firms and households to borrow.  
The average interest rate on new loans to firms declined to 4.5 per cent in November , while the cost of 
issuing market-based debt remained at 3.6 per cent. The average rate on new mortgages edged down 
to 3.5 per cent.   
 
Growth in bank lending to firms rose to 1.5 per cent in December, up from 1.0 per cent in November, 
amid a strong monthly flow. Growth in debt securities issued by firms moderated to 3.2 per cent in 
annual terms. Mortgage lending continued to rise gradually but remained muted overall, with an 
annual growth rate of 1.1 per cent. 
Credit standards for business loans tightened again in the fourth quarter of 2024, having broadly 
stabilised over the previous four quarters, as reported in our latest bank lending survey. The renewed 
tightening mainly reflected banks becoming more concerned about the risks faced by their customers 
and less willing to take on risks themselves. Demand for loans by firms increased slightly in the fourth 
quarter but remained weak overall. Credit standards for mortgages were broadly unchanged, after 
three quarters of easing, while the demand for mortgages again increased strongly, mainly because of 
more attractive interest rates.  
Conclusion  
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are determined to ensure 
that inflation stabilises sustainably at our two per cent medium-term target. We will follow a data-
dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary policy stance. 
In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook in light 
of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of 
monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to a particular rate path. 
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation 
stabilises sustainably at our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary 
policy transmission. 
We are now ready to take your questions. 
 