Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to lower the three key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. In 
particular, the decision to lower the deposit facility rate – the rate through which we steer the monetary 
policy stance – is based on our updated assessment of the inflation outlook, the dynamics of 
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission.  
The disinflation process is well on track. Inflation has continued to develop broadly in line with the staff 
projections and is set to return to our two per cent medium-term target in the course of this year. Most 
measures of underlying inflation suggest that inflation will settle at around our target on a sustained 
basis. Domestic inflation remains high, mostly because wages and prices in certain sectors are still 
adjusting to the past inflation surge with a substantial delay. But wage growth is moderating as 
expected, and profits are partially buffering the impact on inflation. 
Our recent interest rate cuts are gradually making new borrowing less expensive for firms and 
households. At the same time, financing conditions continue to be tight, also because our monetary 
policy remains restrictive and past interest rate hikes are still transmitting to the stock of credit , with 
some maturing loans being rolled over at higher rates. The economy is still facing headwinds but rising 
real incomes and the gradually fading effects of restrictive monetary policy should support a pick -up in 
demand over time.  
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises sustainably at our two per cent medium-term 
target. We will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the 
appropriate monetary policy stance. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our 
assessment of the inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics 
of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre- committing to 
a particular rate path. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.