Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. The 
incoming information has broadly confirmed our previous assessment of the medium- term inflation 
outlook. Inflation has continued to fall, led by lower food and goods price inflation. Most measures of 
underlying inflation are easing, wage growth is gradually moderating, and firms are absorbing part of 
the rise in labour costs in their profits. Financing conditions remain restrictive and our past interest rate 
increases continue to weigh on demand, which is helping to push down inflation. But domestic price 
pressures are strong and are keeping services price inflation high.  
We are determined to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner. We consider that the key ECB interest rates are at levels that are making a substantial 
contribution to the ongoing disinflation process. Our future decisions will ensure that our policy rates 
will stay sufficiently restrictive for as long as necessary. If our updated assessment of the inflation 
outlook, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission were to 
further increase our confidence that inflation is converging to our target in a sustained manner, it 
would be appropriate to reduce the current level of monetary policy restriction. In any event, we will 
continue to follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate 
level and duration of restriction, and we are not pre-committing to a particular rate path. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.