Inflation
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, which has been calculated using Eurostat estimates for 
Germany, inflation was 8.5 per cent in January. This would be 0.7 percentage points lower than the 
December figure, with the decline owing mainly to a renewed sharp drop in energy prices. Market-
based indicators suggest that energy prices over the coming years will be significantly lower than 
expected at the time of our last meeting. Food price inflation edged higher to 14.1 per cent, as the past 
surge in the cost of energy and of other inputs for food production is still feeding through to consumer 
prices. 
Price pressures remain strong, partly because high energy costs are spreading throughout the 
economy. Inflation excluding energy and food remained at 5.2 per cent in January, with inflation for 
non-energy industrial goods rising to 6.9 per cent and services inflation declining to 4.2 per cent. Other 
indicators of underlying inflation are also still high. Government measures to compensate households 
for high energy prices will dampen inflation in 2023 but are expected to raise inflation once they 
expire. At the same time, the scale of some of these measures depends on the evolution of energy 
prices and their expected contribution to inflation is particularly uncertain. 
Although supply bottlenecks are gradually easing, their delayed effects are still pushing up goods price 
inflation. The same holds true for the lifting of pandemic-related restrictions: while weakening, the 
effect of pent-up demand is still driving up prices, especially in the services sector.  
Wages are growing faster, supported by robust labour markets, with some catch-up to high inflation 
becoming the main theme in wage negotiations. At the same time, recent data on wage dynamics 
have been in line with the December Eurosystem staff projections. Most measures of longer-term 
inflation expectations currently stand at around two per cent, but these warrant continued monitoring.