Economic activity
According to Eurostat’s preliminary flash estimate, the euro area economy grew by 0.1 per cent in the 
fourth quarter of 2022. While above the December Eurosystem staff projections, this outcome means 
that economic activity has slowed markedly since mid-2022 and we expect it to stay weak in the near 
term. Subdued global activity and high geopolitical uncertainty, especially owing to Russia’s unjustified 
war against Ukraine and its people, continue to act as headwinds to euro area growth. Together with 
high inflation and tighter financing conditions, these headwinds dampen spending and production, 
especially in the manufacturing sector.  
However, supply bottlenecks are gradually easing, the supply of gas has become more secure, firms 
are still working off large order backlogs and confidence is improving. Moreover, output in the services 
sector has been holding up, supported by continuing reopening effects and stronger demand for 
leisure activities. Rising wages and the recent decline in energy price inflation are also set to ease the 
loss of purchasing power that many people have experienced owing to high inflation. This, in turn, will 
support consumption. Overall, the economy has proved more resilient than expected and should 
recover over the coming quarters.  
The unemployment rate remained at its historical low of 6.6 per cent in December 2022. However, the 
rate at which jobs are being created may slow and unemployment could rise over the coming quarters.  
Government support measures to shield the economy from the impact of high energy prices should be 
temporary, targeted and tailored to preserving incentives to consume less energy. In particular, as the 
energy crisis becomes less acute, it is important to now start rolling these measures back promptly in 
line with the fall in energy prices and in a concerted manner. Any such measures falling short of these 
principles are likely to drive up medium-term inflationary pressures, which would call for a stronger 
monetary policy response. Moreover, in line with the EU’s economic governance framework, fiscal 
policies should be oriented towards making our economy more productive and gradually bringin g 
down high public debt. Policies to enhance the euro area’s supply capacity, especially in the energy 
sector, can help reduce price pressures in the medium term. To that end, governments should swiftly  
 
implement their investment and structural reform plans under the Next Generation EU programme. 
The reform of the EU’s economic governance framework should be concluded rapidly.