Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.  
We would like to begin by congratulating Croatia on joining the euro area on 1 January 2023. We also 
warmly welcome Boris Vujčić, the Governor of Hrvatska narodna banka, to the Governing Council. We 
will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting. 
The Governing Council will stay the course in raising interest rates significantly at a steady pace and 
in keeping them at levels that are sufficiently restrictive to ensure a timely return of inflation to our two 
per cent medium-term target. Accordingly, the Governing Council today decided to raise the three key 
ECB interest rates by 50 basis points and we expect to raise them further. In view of the underlying 
inflation pressures, we intend to raise interest rates by another 50 basis points at our next monetary 
policy meeting in March and we will then evaluate the subsequent path of our monetary policy. 
Keeping interest rates at restrictive levels will over time reduce inflation by dampening demand and 
will also guard against the risk of a persistent upward shift in inflation expectations. In any event, our 
future policy rate decisions will continue to be data-dependent and follow a meeting-by-meeting 
approach.  
The Governing Council today also decided on the modalities for reducing the Eurosystem’s holdings of 
securities under the asset purchase programme (APP). As communicated in December, the APP 
portfolio will decline by €15 billion per month on average from the beginning of March until the end of 
June 2023, and the subsequent pace of portfolio reduction will be determined over time. Partial 
reinvestments will be conducted broadly in line with current practice. In particular, the remaining 
reinvestment amounts will be allocated proportionally to the share of redemptions across each 
constituent programme of the APP and, under the public sector purchase programme (PSPP), to the 
share of redemptions of each jurisdiction and across national and supranational issuers. For our 
corporate bond purchases, the remaining reinvestments will be tilted more strongly towards issuers 
with a better climate performance. Without prejudice to our price stability objective, this approach will 
support the gradual decarbonisation of the Eurosystem’s corporate bond holdings, in line with the 
goals of the Paris Agreement.  
 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website. T he detailed 
modalities for reducing the APP holdings are described in a separate press release to be published at 
15:45 CET. 
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.