Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB, 
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB 
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference. 
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged.  Since our 
last meeting in January, inflation has declined further. In the latest ECB staff projections, inflation has 
been revised down, in particular for 2024 which mainly reflects a lower contribution from energy prices. 
Staff now project inflation to average 2.3 per cent in 2024, 2.0 per cent in 2025 and 1.9 per cent in 
2026. The projections for inflation excluding energy and food have also been revised down and 
average 2.6 per cent for 2024, 2.1 per cent for 2025 and 2.0 per cent for 2026. Although most 
measures of underlying inflation have eased further, domestic price pressures remain high, in part 
owing to strong growth in wages. Financing conditions are restrictive and our past interest rate 
increases continue to weigh on demand, which is helping push down inflation. Staff have revised down 
their growth projection for 2024 to 0.6 per cent, with economic activity expected to remain subdued in 
the near term. Thereafter, staff expect the economy to pick up and to grow at 1.5 per cent in 2025 and 
1.6 per cent in 2026, supported initially by consumption and later also by investment.  
We are determined to ensure that inflation returns to our two per cent medium-term target in a timely 
manner. Based on our current assessment, we consider that the key ECB interest rat es are at levels 
that, maintained for a sufficiently long duration, will make a substantial contribution to this goal. Our 
future decisions will ensure that our policy rates will be set at sufficiently restrictive levels for as long 
as necessary.  
We will continue to follow a data-dependent approach to determining the appropriate level and 
duration of restriction. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the 
inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of underlying 
inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. 
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.  
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain 
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.